Gracias por venir Gracias por venir in Spanish means thanks for coming
Gracias por venir.
So there's two things that we can see in this sentence.
We can use this sentence as like a hook to remember two important things about Spanish.
The first thing is that we have two words for for.
We already saw another word for for.
For example, how are we saying for me
Para mi.
Para mi, good.
And for you speaking informally.
Para ti.
So we had mi and ti coming with prepositions.
Para mi, para ti.
de mi from me de di from you but then for the other people we just say for he for example so how is for him or for he in Spanish
Para él.
Good.
And for her.
Para ella.
Good.
So this para is when something is for somebody.
No?
So for example, if we want to say this is for you, speaking informally, let's say it's a masculine object.
This this one is for you.
How would you say that?
What is tonight?
Ah, esta.
Good, so that's your hook and you go from there.
Esta noche.
But I want a masculine thing.
Esto?
What you should do is look at somewhere that you've used it.
So you should look at this car.
Este.
And then you find it.
These are the processes that we're learning, and this is half of the method.
You can take yourself
through those processes when you need to find it.
Yeah.
And then it comes to your memory.
Then you know it after that.
But the first few times you need to have a look around, let's say, and see to find it.
So this or this one, masculine thing.
Este.
So this one is for you speaking informally.
Este S
Para ti.
Good.
Este es para ti, if we mean a masculine thing.
What if you meant these are for you, uh masculine or mixed things
Estos son para ti.
Well done.
So we saw that actually for this and this we have este and estos.
In este we have the e of el and in estos we have the os of los.
Estos son para ti.
So this is the four that we learned until now.
No?
Then we have por, which is much more flexible.
It has many more meanings.
Let's investigate some of them.
Poor.
You can use it like because of.
No, sometimes when we say for in English, we mean because of.
For example, if you say for this reason, what you mean is because of this reason.
So you don't mean para.
You mean por.
So por also means for in the sense of because of.
And actually in the words because and why, which were
Porque.
Here in Y we see that it's because of.
Porque Y actually means because of what?
Because of what?
And then porque as because we said that we have the same word for wine because means because of that.
So in both cases you have por meaning because of.
So reason in Spanish is razón.
Rason or Razon in most of Spain Razon but in most of the Spanish speaking world rason rason is feminine, so how would you say this reason?
Esta razón.
Good.
So how would you say because of this reason I don't want to go?
Because of this reason I don't want to go.
Let's contrast the two.
What was to buy?
Do you remember tobai?
Comprar good comprar you can say I'm buying it for you.
How would you say that?
Let's keep it informal.
I'm buying it for you
Lo compro para ti.
Good.
That means, you know, this thing I'm buying it for you.
But maybe in some context you want to say I'm buying it because of you.
How would you say that?
Lo compro por ti.
Good.
So it doesn't mean necessarily that this thing is for that person, just that you've bought it because of that person.
No?
So
Maybe you buy an ashtray in your house and your one friend that smokes comes and you say, Lo he comprado por ti, I have bought it because of you.
If you say lo he comprado para ti, for you, then he'll want to take that straight home.
Another use for por
is when we're talking about time.
When you're talking about periods of time, for two weeks, for two days, you will not say para, you will say por.
This is another place where you use por.
The word for day is dia, dia
Dia.
It's actually related to an Indo-European root, which just means a very old root, meaning light and daiti in English comes from the same root.
Or the J of Jupiter is actually also from this root.
Jupiter means something like the father of the gods.
You have Peter like paternal there and Ju from this same root.
As Dianneity, and of course you have Jupiter, which is the biggest planet, so the father of the gods Jupiter
Dia is a word that looks feminine and it's one of those few words that end in a that look feminine that are masculine.
So the day is
El día andos
And every day is all the days.
Before we said todo el tiempo, to say all the time.
If you want to say every day, you say all the days.
How do you think that would sound?
Todos los días.
Good.
Todos.
In plural.
Todos los días.
Good.
If you wanted to say I'm staying for three days, three is tres.
I'm staying for three days.
I remain myself for three days.
So how would you say that?
I'm staying for three days.
Me quedo por tres días.
Very good.
I'm staying for three days.
How would you say I will stay for three days?
I will stay for three days.
You don't really need you don't need the will here.
The fact that you say for three days is already some kind of uh future context
No, the days didn't happen yet.
But let's practice the future.
So I will stay for three days.
So it's giv.
In both futures we are adding on to the verb, huh?
Givare.
Yes, we are pushing it into the future.
So I will stay for three days.
Me quedaré por tres dias.
Good.
So this sounds a little bit more certain, you know, when you use the the future.
Me quedo por tres días, I'm staying for three days, me quedaré por tres días, I will stay for three days.
How would you say I would stay for three days?
I would stay for three days.
A nice hook to remember wood is a I would like or it would please me.
This is a nice hook.
Me gustaría.
So this is a nice hook to remember wood because it's something that's very common that you will use a lot.
So what is that little bit you need for wood that you can pluck out of Megustaria?
The IA ending.
Perfect.
So I would stay for three days
Me quedaria por tres días.
Good.
But I have to work.
You remember what is to work?
We saw it very briefly.
Trabajar.
Trabajar, good.
Trabajar is T-R-A-B-A-J-A-R and that J-A-R makes Jar Trabajar.
So, but I have to work.
Yes, now altogether, huh?
I would stay for three days, but I have to work and not from memory but thinking it through.
Good.
So
Uh thinking it through again, taking that time to think it through again.
I would stay is the first bit.
Good.
For three days.
For three?
But I have to work.
Pero tengo que trabajar.
Perfect.
Me quedaría por three, pero tengo que trabajar.
Very good.